SEN319 Software Project Management  Project Selection  Dr. Hasan   ÇİFCİ
Agenda  ▪   Selecting the Right Project  ▪   Identifying Potential Projects  ▪   Aligning IT with Business Strategy  ▪   Focusing on broad organizational needs  ▪   Categorizing IT projects  ▪   Performing financial analyses  ▪   Using a weighted scoring model  ▪   Implementing a balanced scorecard  ▪   Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Focusing on broad organizational needs  ▪   Categorizing IT projects  ▪   Performing financial analyses  ▪   Using a weighted scoring model  ▪   Implementing a balanced scorecard  ▪   Workshop  2 /24
3 /24  ▪   The   first   step   in   project   management   is   deciding   what   projects   to   do   in  the   first   place .  ▪   Therefore,   project   initiation   starts   with   identifying   potential   projects,  using   realistic   methods   to   select   which   projects   to   work   on,   and   then  formalizing   their   initiation   by   issuing   some   sort   of   project   charter .  Selecting the Right Project  ▪   Identifying Potential Projects  ▪   Aligning IT with Business Strategy  ▪   Focusing on broad organizational needs  ▪   Categorizing IT projects  ▪   Performing financial analyses  ▪   Using a weighted scoring model  ▪   Implementing a balanced scorecard  Steps  Common  Techniques  for Selection
4 /24  Selecting the Right Project  Identifying Potential Projects   (Ex: Selection of IT Projects)  Start
5 /24  Selecting the Right Project  ▪   A   business   strategy   is   an   outline   of   the   actions   and   decisions   a  company   plans   to   take   to   reach   its   goals   and   objectives .  Aligning IT with Business Strategy  ▪   Most innovative product or service  ▪   Grow sales from new products  ▪   Improve customer service  ▪   Cornering a young market  ▪   Product differentiation  ▪   Pricing strategies  ▪   Technological advantage  ▪   Improve customer retention  Examples
6 /24  Selecting the Right Project  ▪   Aligning   IT   projects   with   business   strategy   is   at   the   heart   of   selecting  IT   projects .  ▪   It   is   often   difficult   to   educate   line   managers   on   technology’s  possibilities   and   limitations   and   keep   IT   professionals   in   tune   with  changing   business   needs .  ▪   An   organization   must   develop   a   strategy   for   using   IT   to   define   how   it  will   support   the   organization’s   objectives .  ▪   Many   information   systems   are   classified   as   strategic   because   they  directly   support   key   business   strategies .  Aligning IT with Business Strategy
7 /24  Selecting the Right Project  Aligning IT with Business Strategy  2020  Spending  2020   Growth  (%)  2021  Spending  2021   Growth  (%)  2022  Spending  2022   Growth  (%)  Data Center  Systems   178,836   2.5   196,142   9.7   207,440   5.8  Enterprise  Software   529,028   9.1   600,895   13.6   669,819   11.5  Devices   696,990   - 1.5   801,970   15.1   820,756   2.3  IT Services   1,071,281   1.7   1,191,347   11.2   1,293,857   8.6  Communications  Services   1,396,334   - 1.5   1,451,284   3.9   1,482,324   2.1  Worldwide IT Spending Forecast (Million   $ )  Ref: Gartner  ▪   Information systems often are central to business strategy.  ▪   Worldwide IT spending is increasing.
8 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Organizations   identify   many   potential   projects   as   part   of   their   strategic  planning   processes,   and   they   need   to   narrow   down   the   list   of   potential  projects   to   the   ones   that   will   be   of   most   benefit .  ▪   They   often   rely   on   experienced   project   managers   to   help   them   make  project   selection   decisions .  ▪   Selecting   projects   is   not   an   exact   science,   and   many   methods   exist   for  selecting   projects .  ▪   Five   common   techniques :  1.   Focusing   on   broad   organizational   needs  2.   Categorizing   IT   projects  3.   Performing   financial   analyses  4.   Using   a   weighted   scoring   model  5.   Implementing   a   balanced   scorecard
9 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Top   managers   must   focus   on   meeting   their   organizations’   many   needs  when   deciding   what   projects   to   undertake,   when   to   undertake   them,  and   to   what   level .  ▪   Projects   that   address   broad   organizational   needs   are   much   more   likely  to   be   successful   because   they   will   be   important   to   the   organization .  Focusing on Broad Organizational Needs  1.   Do   people in the organization agree that the project needs to be done?  2.   Does the organization   have the desire and capacity to provide adequate  funds to perform the project?  3.   Is there a   strong will to make the project succeed?  Three important criteria:   need ,   funding , and   will
10 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Another   method   for   selecting   projects   is   based   on   various  categorizations :  •   Project’s   impetus :  1.   Solving   a   problem  2.   Aligning   with   new   regulations   and   directives  3.   Taking   advantage   of   new   opportunities  •   Time   window :   How   long   will   it   take   to   complete   a   project   and   what  is   the   deadline   for   completing   it?  •   General   priority :   High,   medium,   or   low   priority   based   on   the   current  business   environment .  Categorizing IT Projects
11 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Financial   considerations   are   an   important   aspect   of   the   project  selection   process .  ▪   Three   primary   methods   for   projecting   the   financial   value   of   projects :  1.   Net   present   value   analysis  2.   Return   on   investment  3.   Payback   analysis  Performing Financial Analyses
12 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Time   value   of   money   principle :   A   dollar   earned   today   is   worth   more  than   a   dollar   earned   5   years   from   now .  ▪   NPV   analysis   is   a   method   of   calculating   the   expected   net   monetary  gain   or   loss   from   a   project   by   calculating   the   value   of   all   expected  future   cash   inflows   and   outflows   at   the   present   time .  ▪   An   organization   should   consider   only   projects   with   a   positive   NPV   if  financial   value   is   a   key   criterion   for   project   selection .  Performing Financial Analyses  Net Present Value   (NPV)   Analysis  A: Cash flow  t: Year (starts from 0)  r: Discount rate  ▪   The   discount rate   is the   interest rate used to discount cash flows.  ▪   Discount factor: 1/(1 + r ) t
13 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  Performing Financial Analyses  Net Present Value   (NPV)   Analysis  ▪   Even if the totals  are equal, NVPs  are different.  ▪   Bigger NPV is  better .
14 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Another   important   financial   consideration   is   return   on   investment  (ROI) .   ROI   is   the   result   of   subtracting   the   project   costs   from   the  benefits   and   then   dividing   by   the   costs .  ▪   For   example,   if   you   invest   $ 100   today   and   next   year   it   is   worth   $ 110 ,  your   ROI   is   ( $ 110   –   100 )/ 100   or   0 . 10   ( 10   percent) .  ▪   Note   that   the   ROI   is   always   a   percentage .   It   can   be   positive   or  negative .  ▪   For   multiyear   projects,   it   is   best   to   use   discounted   costs   and   benefits  when   calculating   ROI .  Performing Financial Analyses  Return on Investment   (ROI)  ROI = (total discounted benefits   -   total discounted costs)/discounted costs
15 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  Performing Financial Analyses  Return on Investment   (ROI)
16 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Payback   analysis   is   another   important   financial   tool   when   selecting  projects .  ▪   Payback   period   is   the   amount   of   time   it   will   take   to   recoup   the   total  dollars   invested   in   a   project,   in   terms   of   net   cash   inflows .   In   other  words,   payback   analysis   determines   how   much   time   will   elapse   before  accrued   benefits   overtake   accrued   and   continuing   costs .  ▪   Payback   occurs   when   the   net   cumulative   benefits   equal   the   net  cumulative   costs   or   when   the   net   cumulative   benefits   minus   costs  equal   zero .  ▪   Beyond   this   point,   discounted   benefits   exceed   discounted   costs   and  the   project   shows   a   profit .  Performing Financial Analyses  Payback Analysis
17 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  Performing Financial Analyses  Payback Analysis
18 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   A   weighted   scoring   model   is   a   tool   that   provides   a   systematic   process  for   selecting   projects   based   on   many   criteria .  ▪   The   first   step   is   to   identify   criteria   that   are   important   to   the   project  selection   process .  ▪   Next,   you   assign   a   weight   to   each   criterion   based   on   its   importance .  ▪   Possible   criteria   for   IT   projects :  •   Supports   key   business   objectives   or   strategies  •   Has   strong   internal   sponsor  •   Has   strong   customer   support  •   Uses   realistic   level   of   technology  •   Can   be   implemented   in   one   year   or   less  •   Provides   positive   NPV  •   Has   low   risk   in   meeting   scope,   time,   and   cost   goals  Using a Weighted Scoring Model
19 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  Using a Weighted Scoring Model
20 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  ▪   Robert   Kaplan   and   David   Norton   developed   an   approach   to   help   select  and   manage   projects   that   align   with   business   strategy .  ▪   A   balanced   scorecard   (BSC)   is   a   strategic   planning   and   management  system   that   helps   organizations   align   business   activities   to   strategy,  improve   communications,   and   monitor   performance   against   strategic  goals .  ▪   It   is   a   performance   metric   used   to   identify,   improve,   and   control   a  business's   various   functions   and   resulting   outcomes .  ▪   The   Gartner   Group   estimates   that   over   half   of   large   U . S .   organizations  use   this   approach .  Implementing a Balanced Scorecard   (BSC)
21 /24  Methods for Selecting Projects  Implementing a Balanced Scorecard
22 /24  Workshop  Project Selection for   TechNova   Inc.  ▪   TechNova   Inc .   is   a   mid - sized   technology   company   that   specializes   in   software   solutions   for   the  financial   services   industry .   The   company   is   looking   to   invest   in   a   new   IT   project   that   aligns   with   its  long - term   business   strategy   of   expanding   its   product   offerings,   improving   customer   satisfaction,   and  reducing   operational   costs .   The   company's   leadership   team   has   identified   three   potential   IT   projects,  but   only   one   can   be   selected   due   to   budget   constraints .  Scenario and Your Tasks  ▪   As   part   of   TechNova   Inc . ’s   project   evaluation   team,   your   goal   is   to   assess   these   three   projects  using   the   following   methods :  ▪   Project   Categorization :   Prioritize   the   projects   based   on   the   company’s   strategic   goals .  ▪   Weighted   Scoring   Model :   Develop   and   apply   a   weighted   scoring   model   using   criteria   such  as   alignment   with   business   goals,   financial   return,   risk,   and   customer   impact .  ▪   Each   group   must   choose   one   project   and   justify   their   decision   based   on   the   analysis  performed .
23 /24  Workshop  Project Selection for   TechNova   Inc.  Project 1: Customer Relationship Management (CRM) System  Upgrade  • Description : Upgrade the existing CRM system to provide better insights  into customer behavior, increase automation in customer service, and  enhance user experience for both employees and customers.  • Expected Benefits :  •   10% increase in customer retention.  •   5% increase in new customer acquisition.  •   Improved customer satisfaction scores.  • Risk : Medium (there’s a risk of disruption during the transition to the new  system).  • Time to Completion : 12 months.  Projects in the Scenarios  Project 2: Cloud Infrastructure Migration  • Description : Migrate all on - premise data and applications to a cloud -  based infrastructure to reduce operational costs and improve scalability.  • Expected Benefits :  •   15% reduction in operational IT costs.  •   Improved system reliability and disaster recovery capabilities.  •   20% faster deployment for new services.  • Risk : High (potential security concerns and a lengthy migration process).  • Time to Completion : 18 months.  Project 3: AI - Powered Financial Analytics  Tool  • Description : Develop an AI - powered tool that  provides real - time financial analytics to  customers, allowing them to make more  informed decisions. The tool will use machine  learning to analyze financial data trends and  offer personalized recommendations.  • Expected Benefits :  •   Increase customer acquisition by  10%.  •   Enhance product differentiation in the  market.  •   Position   TechNova   as an innovative  leader in the industry.  • Risk : Medium (the tool is new and untested in  the market; there are potential integration issues  with existing systems).  • Time to Completion : 15 months.
Thank you…  Hasan ÇİFCİ